Document Introductory ENSRainbow Topics (#1513)
namehash/ensnode: docs/ensnode.io/src/content/docs/ensrainbow/concepts/unknown-labels.mdx

---
title: Unknown Labels
description: Understanding the fundamental problem of unknown labels in ENS and how ENSRainbow mitigates it.
sidebar:
  label: Unknown Labels
  order: 2
keywords: [ensrainbow, unknown labels, labelhash, healing, rainbow tables, keccak256]
---

## The Problem: Unknown Labels

When querying indexed ENS names, you may encounter labels represented as [**Encoded LabelHashes**](/docs/reference/terminology#encoded-labelhash) like `[428...b0b]` instead of human-readable strings.

> An **Unknown Label** is a [**Label**](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#label) for which the human-readable string is not available, and only the [**LabelHash**](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#labelhash) is known. These labels are displayed using the format `[{LabelHash}]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An **Unknown Label** is a [**Label**](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#label) that is known to exist, but where only the [**LabelHash**](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#labelhash) of the label is known, not the human-readable string. These unknown labels are displayed as encoded labelhashes using the format `[{LabelHash}]`.
```

Unknown labels are an unfortunate user experience issue in the ENS ecosystem. They make names difficult to read, understand, and work with in applications.

### Format: Encoded LabelHash

When an unknown label is encountered, it is represented as an **Encoded LabelHash** in the format `[{labelhash}]`, where `{labelhash}` is the 64-character hexadecimal representation of the labelhash (without the `0x` prefix).

> **Examples:**

Reviewer: Suggest to include an example with multiple unknown labels.

## What Causes Unknown Labels?

Unknown labels arise from the fundamental design of the ENS protocol:

### The ENS Registry Design

Unknown labels are a consequence of the ENS Registry not emitting the actual label in events when subnames are created. Only the labelhash is emitted.

**Understanding the distinction:**
- The ENS Registry contract ([`ENSRegistryWithFallback`](https://etherscan.io/address/0x00000000000c2e074ec69a0dfb2997ba6c7d2e1e#code)) stores only the **node** for each registered name (the node is a 32-byte hash computed via `namehash`)
- **However**, indexers don't generally read what's stored on-chain—they read the data from **events** emitted by contracts
- The problem for indexers emerges from what's emitted in events, not what's stored

> **The root cause:** All subnames are created by calling the [`setSubnodeOwner`](https://etherscan.io/address/0x00000000000c2e074ec69a0dfb2997ba6c7d2e1e#code#F1#L84) function on the Registry contract. When this happens, the Registry emits a `NewOwner` event for the newly created subname. However, this event contains a parameter misleadingly named `label` that is **not actually the label string**—it's the **labelhash** of the new subname's label:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All subnames in the ENS Registry are created by calling [`setSubnodeOwner`](https://etherscan.io/address/0x00000000000c2e074ec69a0dfb2997ba6c7d2e1e#code#F1#L84). This emits a `NewOwner` event for the newly created subname. However, this event contains a parameter misleadingly named `label` that is **not actually the label string**—it's the **labelhash** of the new subname's label.
```

In many cases, the labels that make up a name can be made **known**:

- **Contract events**: Some contracts (like `ETHRegistrarController` or `NameWrapper`) emit the human-readable label in their events
- **[Rainbow table](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#rainbow-table) lookups**: The human-readable label for a given labelhash can sometimes be determined via rainbow table lookups and other strategies
- **ENSRainbow [healing](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#heal)**: ENSRainbow attempts to heal unknown labels by looking up labelhashes in its rainbow tables

However, if none of these methods succeed, the label remains unknown and must be represented as an encoded labelhash.

## Why Unknown Labels Are Forever a Consideration

Unknown labels are a **permanent architectural constraint** of the ENS protocol, not a temporary issue that can be fully eliminated. Here's why:

### 1. Protocol Design Immutability

> The ENS Registry contract design is immutable—it cannot be changed retroactively. The fundamental design decision to store only nodes (hashes) rather than labels means that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ENS Registry contract design is immutable. It cannot be changed retroactively.
```

- Historical subnames created without label emission will always have unknown labels unless they can be healed via rainbow tables
- Future subnames can still be created via direct Registry calls that only provide labelhashes

> - The protocol cannot require label emission for all subname creation methods without breaking backward compatibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think better to cut these ideas and just simply identify how the registry is immutable.

### 2. Cryptographic One-Way Function

The `labelhash` function uses `keccak256`, a cryptographic hash function that is **one-way**:

- Given a label, you can compute its labelhash: `labelhash("vitalik") → 0xaf2c...`
- Given a labelhash, you **cannot** reverse it to get the original label: `0xaf2c... → ???`

This means that without external knowledge (rainbow tables, event logs, etc.), a labelhash cannot be converted back to its original label.

### 3. Ongoing Subname Creation

New subnames continue to be created on-chain. While many modern contracts emit label information in events, the protocol itself does not guarantee this. Unknown labels will continue to appear as long as:

- Direct Registry calls are used to create subnames
- Contracts that don't emit label information are used

> - Historical data without label information is indexed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New subnames continue to be created on-chain. While many modern contracts emit label information in events, the protocol itself does not guarantee this.
```

Better to cut those ideas.

## How Unknown Labels Influence Indexing

> Unknown labels significantly impact how ENS data is indexed and queried:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unknown labels impact how ENS data is indexed and queried:
```

### Label Mutability Over Time

The representation of labels can change over time as ENSRainbow's healing capabilities improve:

- **Time 1**: ENSRainbow cannot heal label X → label is represented as `[labelhash]`
- **Time 2**: ENSRainbow gains the ability to heal label X → label transitions from unknown to known

This mutability means that:
- Label representations should not be used as immutable identifiers
- The node (computed via `namehash`) should always be used as the stable identifier for querying
- For deterministic results, pin healing to a specific label set ID + version (see [Label Sets & Versioning](/ensrainbow/concepts/label-sets-and-versioning))

### Subgraph-Unindexable Labels

The legacy ENS Subgraph specifies that **Unknown Labels** and labels containing certain UTF-8 characters are "invalid" or "subgraph-unindexable". These include:

1. `\0` (null byte) - PostgreSQL does not allow storing this character in text fields
2. `.` (period) - Conflicts with ENS label separator logic
3. `[` (left square bracket) - Conflicts with "unknown label" representations
4. `]` (right square bracket) - Conflicts with "unknown label" representations

> In ENSNode's default *Interpreted Labels* mode (`SUBGRAPH_COMPAT=false`), when a `subgraph-unindexable` label is encountered, it will be represented as an **Encoded LabelHash** even if the actual label data is available. This prevents database and parsing issues while maintaining compatibility with ENS tooling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In ENSNode's default *Interpreted Labels* mode (`SUBGRAPH_COMPAT=false`), when a `subgraph-unindexable` label is encountered, it will be represented as an **Encoded LabelHash** even if the actual label data is available. This simplifies handling for many edge cases.
```

## How Unknown Labels Influence Apps and User Interfaces

> Unknown labels create significant challenges for applications building on ENS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unknown labels create challenges for applications building on ENS:
```

2. **Normalization awareness**: When querying from user input, normalize first; when querying from onchain data, don't normalize
3. **Encoded LabelHash-aware namehash**: Use implementations like [viem's namehash](https://github.com/wevm/viem/blob/fe558fdef7e2e9cd5f3f57d8bdeae0c7ff67a1b0/src/utils/ens/namehash.ts#L36-L51) that handle encoded labelhashes correctly

**ENSNode's Resolution API:**

ENSNode's Resolution API (accessed via the `ENSNodeClient` SDK) accepts names directly without requiring you to compute the node (namehash) yourself. However, you must still normalize the name before passing it to the API. The key difference is that you don't need to manually compute the namehash - you can call methods like `resolveRecords(normalizedName, selection)` directly with the name string.

## The Solution: How ENSRainbow Works

ENSRainbow mitigates the unknown labels problem by providing a **[healing](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#heal) service** that converts labelhashes back to human-readable labels via [rainbow table](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#rainbow-table) lookups.

### What is Healing?

> [**Healing**](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#heal) is the act of converting a labelhash back to its original label via a rainbow table lookup. ENSRainbow maintains pre-computed mappings of `labelhash → label` pairs (called [rainbow records](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#rainbow-record)) that enable this reverse lookup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[**Healing**](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#heal) is the act of converting a labelhash back to its original label via a rainbow table lookup or other special strategies implemented in ENSNode. ENSRainbow maintains pre-computed mappings of `labelhash → label` pairs (called [rainbow records](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#rainbow-record)) that enable this reverse lookup.
```

- **Not all labels can be healed**: Some labelhashes may never be recoverable if the label cannot be discovered from any available source (onchain events, offchain APIs, brute-force generation, user submissions, or other data sources)
- **Growing coverage**: ENSRainbow's goal is to heal as many ENS names as possible, minimizing the probability that end-users encounter unknown labels
- **Multiple label sets**: Different [label sets](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#label-set) (identified by [label set ID](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#label-set-id)) can provide different coverage, allowing the ecosystem to contribute additional healing data

### Label Sets and Versioning

ENSRainbow uses a [**label set**](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#label-set) system to organize rainbow table data:

- **[Label Set ID](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#label-set-id)**: Identifies a collection of [rainbow records](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#rainbow-record) (e.g., `subgraph`, `discovery-a`)
- **[Label Set Version](/ensrainbow/concepts/glossary#label-set-version)**: Monotonically increasing version numbers that enable incremental updates

> - **Deterministic Results**: Clients can pin to specific versions for reproducible healing results

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Deterministic Results**: ENSRainbow clients (such as ENSIndexer) can pin to specific versions for reproducible healing results
```
